Traffic light Signalling device to control competing flows of traffic "Stoplight" redirects here. For other uses, see Stoplight (disambiguation) and Traffic light (disambiguation) . An LED 50- watt traffic light in Portsmouth , United Kingdom Traffic lights , traffic signals , or stoplights – also known as robots in South Africa , [ 1 ] [ 2 ] Zambia , and Namibia – are signalling devices positioned at road intersections , pedestrian crossings , and other locations in order to control the flow of traffic . [ 3 ] Traffic lights usually consist of three signals, transmitting meaningful information to road users through colours and symbols, including arrows and bicycles. The usual traffic light colours are red to stop traffic, amber for traffic change, and green to allow traffic to proceed. These are arranged vertically or horizontally in that order. Although this is internationally standardised, [ 4 ] variations in traffic light sequences and laws exist on national and local scales. [ 5 ] Traffic lights were first introduced in December 1868 on Parliament Square in London to reduce the need for police officers to control traffic. [ 6 ] Since then, electricity and computerised control have advanced traffic light technology and increased intersection capacity. [ 7 ] The system is also used for other purposes, including the control of pedestrian movements, variable lane control (such as tidal flow systems or smart motorways ), and railway level crossings . History Main article: History of traffic lights In December 1868, the first traffic signals showing a red or green light at night were installed outside the Houses of Parliament in London. [ 8 ] They were invented by John Peake Knight . [ 8 ] A police constable raised or lowered the semaphore arms and, at night, operated a lever to control the lights which drivers and pedestrians saw. [ 9 ] This system exploded on 2 January 1869 and was taken down. This early traffic signal led to other parts of the world implementing similar traffic signal systems. In the first two decades of the 20th century, semaphore traffic signals like the one in London were in use all over the United States. These traffic signals were controlled by a traffic officer who changed the commands on the signal to direct traffic. [ 10 ] In 1912, the first electric traffic light was developed by Lester Wire , a policeman in Salt Lake City , Utah . [ 11 ] In August 1914, it was installed by the American Traffic Signal Company on the corner of East 105th Street and Euclid Avenue in Cleveland , Ohio. [ 12 ] [ 13 ] [ 14 ] In 1920, the first four-way, three-colour traffic light was created by William Potts in Detroit, Michigan . [ 15 ] His design was the first to include an amber 'caution' light along with red and green lights. [ 16 ] Potts was Superintendent of Signals for the Police Department of Detroit. In 1921, he installed automatic four-way, three-colour traffic lights in 15 towers across Detroit. [ 17 ] [ 16 ] [ 15 ] By 1922, traffic towers were beginning to be controlled by automatic timers more widely. The main advantage of the use of the timer was that it saved cities money by replacing traffic officers. New York City was able to reassign all but 500 of its 6,000 officers working on the traffic squad, saving the city $12,500,000. [ 18 ] In 1923, Garrett Morgan patented a design of a manually operated three-way traffic light with moving arms. [ 19 ] The control of traffic lights changed with the rise of computers in America in the 1950s. One of the best historical examples of computerised control of lights was in Denver , Colorado in 1952. In 1967, Toronto , Canada was the first to use more advanced computers that were better at vehicle detection. [ 7 ] The computers maintained control over 159 signals in Toronto through telephone lines. [ 20 ] Vehicular signals Traffic lights can have several additional lights for filter turns or bus lanes. Road crossing of A970 with Sumburgh Airport 's runway in Shetland . The movable barrier closes when an aircraft lands or takes off. Horizontally-mounted signals in Japan A set of lights, known as a signal head, [ 21 ] : 3.2.4 may have one, two, three, or more aspects. The most common signal type has three aspects facing the oncoming traffic: red on top, amber (yellow) below, and green below that. Additional aspects may be fitted to the signal, usually to indicate specific restrictions or filter movements. Meanings of signals The 1968 Vienna Convention on Road Signs and Signals Chapter III provides international standards for the setup of traffic signal operations. Not all states have ratified the convention. A three-colour signal head should have three non-flashing lights which are red, amber , and green, arranged either horizontally (on the side opposite to the direction of traffic) [ clarification needed ] or vertically (with red on top). A two-colour signal head may be used in temporary operation and consists of red and green non-flashing lights. In both cases, all lights should be circular or arrow-shaped. [ 4 ] Permissible signals for regulating vehicle traffic (other than public transport vehicles) are outlined in Article 23: [ 4 ] Standard meanings for traffic lights internationally (Vienna Convention, Article 23) Light type Meaning Non-flashing Red Traffic may not proceed beyond the stop line, or otherwise enter the intersection. Red/Amber The signal is about to change, but the red light rule continues to apply. Amber Traffic may not pass the stop line or enter the intersection, unless it cannot safely stop when the light shows. Green Traffic may proceed, unless it would not clear the intersection before the next change of phase. Flashing Red Traffic must not pass the stop line at a level crossing, approach to swing bridge or ferry landing stages, emergency vehicles entering the road, or on the approach to low-flying aircraft. In addition, to attract attention in these locations, it is also equipped with additional alarms and voice prompts. Amber Traffic may proceed but with caution. Green arrows are added to signals to indicate that traffic can proceed in a particular direction while the main lights for that approach are red, or that traffic can only proceed in one particular direction. Alternatively, when combined with another green signal, they may indicate that turning traffic has priority over oncoming traffic (known as a "filter arrow"). [ 21 ] : 3.5 Flashing amber arrows typically indicate that road users must give way (to other drivers and pedestrians) before making a movement in the direction of the arrow. These are used because they are safer, cause less delay, and are more flexible. Flashing amber arrows will normally be located below the solid amber. [ 22 ] Green arrows Arrow aspects may be used to permit certain movements or convey other messages to road users. A green arrow may display to require drivers to turn in a particular direction only or to allow drivers to continue in a particular direction when the signal is red. [ 21 ] : 3.5 Generally, a green phase is illuminated at the beginning of the green phase (a "leading turn") or at the end of the green phase (a "lagging turn"). [ citation needed ] An 'indicative arrow' may be displayed alongside a green light. This indicates to drivers that oncoming traffic is stopped, such that they do not need to give way to that traffic when turning across it. As right-turning traffic (left-side drive) or left-turning traffic (right-side drive) does not normally have priority, this arrow is used to allow turning traffic to clear before the next phase begins. [ 21 ] : 3.5 Some variations of this setup exist. One version is a horizontal bar with five lights – the green and amber arrows are located between the standard green and amber lights. A vertical five-light bar holds the arrows underneath the standard green light. In this arrangement, the amber arrow is sometimes omitted, leaving only the green arrow below the steady green light, or possibly an LED -based device capable of showing both green and amber arrows within a single lamp housing. [ 23 ] A third type is known as a "doghouse" or "cluster head" – a vertical column with the two normal lights is on the right side of the signal, a vertical column with the two arrows is located on the left, and the normal red signal is in the middle above the two columns. Cluster signals in Australia and New Zealand use six signals, the sixth being a red arrow that can operate separately from the standard red light. [ citation needed ] In a fourth type, sometimes seen at intersections in Ontario and Quebec , Canada, there is no dedicated left-turn lamp per se. [ 24 ] [ 25 ] Instead, the normal green lamp flashes rapidly, indicating permission to go straight as well as make a left turn in front of opposing traffic, which is being held by a steady red lamp. This "advance green", or flashing green can be somewhat startling and confusing to drivers not familiar with this system. This can cause confusion amongst visitors to British Columbia, where a flashing green signal denotes a pedestrian-controlled crosswalk. [ 26 ] For this reason, Ontario is phasing out the use of flashing green signals and instead replacing them with arrows. [ 27 ] [ 28 ] Countdown lights Popular in Vietnam and China, countdown lights are additional lights installed next to, or above or below, the main signal lights. The countdown light is displayed by a countdown number with different colours, usually red, yellow, green, matching the colour of the light on. When the light counts to "0" (or 1), the main light colour immediately changes. Countdown lights may have zeros in the tens or none, some countdown lights may flash when getting ready to zero. Yellow lights can have countdown lights, but most lights do not. Usually the countdown light has 2 digits, in case the time of the main light (usually the red light, rarely the green light) is longer than 100 seconds, depending on the type of light, the following possibilities may occur: Lights have not counted down, when 99 seconds are left, start counting. During the standby time, the light may be displayed as "99", "00", "--" or not displayed. Last 2 digits count light of the timeout (the counter light is 15 while the time is 115 seconds, there are some types of lights that count as "-9" or "9-" when the time is 109 seconds) Tens digit on the displayer becomes a letter. Displaying A0 for 100 seconds, B0 for 110 seconds, so forth. Displaying only last 2 digits but with flashing to indicate it's more than 100. A countdown light Countdown lights are also used for both vehicular and pedestrian signals in the Philippines . However, since 2025, the use of countdown timers have been phased out in Metro Manila by the Metropolitan Manila Development Authority to adopt a volume-based traffic signalling system. As a result, instead a countdown timer that will count down to the next phase, green signals will blink five times before turning to yellow. [ 29 ] Issue about yellow light dilemma zone in South Korea In South Korea, the yellow (amber) light dilemma zone is not legally recognised. In other words, when the amber light is on, traffic may not pass the stop line or enter the intersection, even if the traffic cannot safely stop when the light shows. In May 2024, this was reaffirmed by the Supreme Court of Korea , [ 30 ] [ 31 ] for a case where the driver was speeding at 62 km/h in a street limited up to 40 km/h, 55 % higher than the allowed speed. [ 32 ] [ unreliable source? ] Criticism in South Korea says that this is unrealistic and unreasonable. This can cause multiple collisions due to sudden braking. In 2016, when speed limit was up to 60 km/h, proposed alternatives to this kind of collision were only roundabouts, speed compliance increase and speed practice reduction or elderly zones are also proposed solutions. [ 33 ] Yellow trap Without an all-red phase, cross-turning traffic may be caught in a ' yellow trap '. When the signal turns yellow (amber), a turning driver may assume oncoming traffic will stop and a crash may result. For this reason, the US bans sequences that may cause a yellow trap. [ 34 ] This can also happen when emergency vehicles or railroads preempt normal signal operation. [ 35 ] In the United States, signs reading "Oncoming traffic has extended green" or "Oncoming traffic may have extended green" must be posted at intersections where the "yellow trap" condition exists. [ 36 ] [ 37 ] Variations Main article: Variations in traffic light operation The United States is not party to the Vienna Convention ; rather, the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD) outlines correct operation in that country. In the US, a single signal head may have three, four, or five aspects. A single aspect green arrow may be displayed to indicate a continuous movement. The signals must be arranged red, amber, and green vertically (top to bottom) or horizontally (left to right). [ 38 ] In the US, a single-aspect flashing amber signal can be used to raise attention to a warning sign and a single-aspect flashing red signal can be used to raise attention to a "stop", "do not enter", or "wrong way" sign. [ 38 ] Flashing red or amber lights, known as intersection control beacons , are used to reinforce stop signs at intersections. [ 39 ] The MUTCD specifies the following vehicular signals: [ 38 ] Standard meanings for traffic lights in the United States (MUTCD, Chapter 4) Signal Meaning (steady) Meaning (flashing) Circular green Traffic can proceed in any permitted direction, yielding to pedestrians in a crosswalk or other vehicles when turning Not to be used Green arrow Traffic can proceed in the direction shown by the arrow, yielding to any pedestrians in a crosswalk or other vehicles in the intersection Circular yellow The green movement is being terminated and a red signal will soon be displayed Traffic can cautiously enter the intersection, yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles Yellow arrow The green or flashing arrow movement is being terminated Traffic can cautiously enter the intersection to make the movement displayed by the arrow, yielding to pedestrians and other vehicles Circular red Unless another signal permits, traffic shall not enter the intersection except to lawfully turn on red Traffic must stop before entering the intersection, but may then treat the signal by the same rules as a STOP sign. Red arrow Traffic shall not make the movement displayed by the arrow Traffic must stop before entering the intersection, but may then treat the signal by the same rules as a stop sign to make the movement displayed by the arrow. A traffic signal in Halifax , Nova Scotia , with specially shaped lights to assist people with colour blindness In the Canadian province of Quebec and the Maritime provinces, lights are often arranged horizontally, but each aspect is a different shape: red is a square (larger than the normal circle) and usually in pairs at either end of the fixture, amber is a diamond, and green is a circle. In many southern and southwestern U.S. states, most traffic signals are similarly horizontal in order to ease wind resistance during storms and hurricanes. [ 40 ] Japanese traffic signals mostly follow the same rule except that the green "go" signals are referred to as 青 (ao), typically translated as "blue", reflecting a historical change in the Japanese language . As a result, Japanese officials decreed in 1973 that the "go" light should be changed to the bluest possible shade of green, bringing the name more in line with the colour without violating the international "green means go" rule. [ 41 ] In the UK, normal traffic lights follow this sequence: [ 42 ] Red – Stop, do not proceed. Red and amber – Get ready to proceed, but do not proceed yet. Green – Proceed if the intersection or crossing is clear; vehicles are not allowed to block the intersection or crossing. Amber – Stop, unless it is unsafe to do so. A speed sign is a special traffic light, variable traffic sign , or variable-message sign giving drivers a recommended speed to approach the next traffic light in its green phase [ 43 ] and avoid a stop due to reaching the intersection when lights are red. [ 44 ] [ a ] Pedestrian signals Further information: Pedestrian crossing § Signal-controlled crossings See also: Traffic light control and coordination § Pedestrian safety Pedestrian signals are used to inform pedestrians when to cross a road. Most pedestrian signal heads will have two lights: a 'walk' light (normally a walking human figure, typically coloured green or white) and a 'don't walk' light (normally either a red or orange man figure or a hand), though other variations exist. [ 45 ] Pedestrian sequences in various countries Country/ies Sequence Notes Australia, New Zealand, Philippines Green man: safe to cross Flashing red man: do not start to cross; if it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely Red man: do not cross Several intersections in Wellington, New Zealand, have alternative green man figures. Eight intersections near Parliament Buildings have silhouettes of suffragette Kate Sheppard , [ 46 ] while four intersections along Cuba Street have silhouettes of drag performer and LGBT rights activist Carmen Rupe . [ 47 ] China Green: safe to cross Red: do not cross Amber (steady, after green, before red): continue to cross only if unable to stop safely Flashing amber: cross with caution (often used in low-traffic crossing or after midnight) Japan Blue or green man: safe to cross (cyclists may cross or turn left) Flashing blue or green man: do not start to cross; if it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely Red standing man: do not cross Germany, Czechia, Central Europe Green: safe to cross Amber: continue to cross only if unable to stop safely Flashing amber: cross with caution, obey signage (used when lights are out of order or shut down) Red: do not cross Red and amber: do not cross, prepare for green In Germany, Ampelmännchen pedestrian traffic signals have come to be seen as a nostalgic sign for the former German Democratic Republic . In Germany, the fine for crossing a red light if caught is as of 2019 between €5 and €10. [ 48 ] United Kingdom, Ireland, Hong Kong, Switzerland, Macao Green walking man: safe to cross Flashing green man or no man: do not start to cross (only at mid-block crossings); if it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely Red standing man: do not cross In the United Kingdom, there is no direct offence committed if a pedestrian fails to obey crossing signals and many lights commonly only use two still images – a green walking person and a red standing man, this being the general case where the crossing is at a road junction and the pedestrian signals are in combination with those controlling vehicular traffic. United States, Canada, Mexico (Tijuana), Philippines (Makati, Davao) Formerly signals used the text: [ 49 ] WALK DONT WALK Modern version: White walking man: cross with caution Flashing orange stophand: do not start to cross; if it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely Orange stophand: do not enter the intersection The U.S. state of Massachusetts allows an unusual indication variation for pedestrian movement. At signalised intersections without separate pedestrian signal heads, the traffic signals may be programmed to turn red in all directions, followed by a steady display of amber lights simultaneously with the red indications. During this red-plus-amber indication, the intersection is closed to vehicular traffic and pedestrians may cross, usually in whatever direction they choose. Israel Red standing man: do not cross; if it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely Green walking man: safe to cross France green and light, traditionally and in compliance with the international conventions. Red Man: Do Not Cross. If it appears during crossing, then continue to cross if unable to stop safely. Green Man: Safe to Cross. In 2023, a two year experiment was allowed to start on 8 intersections experimenting blinking yellow light and 7 other one frozen yellow light. [ 50 ] Traffic light animation (pedestrians, cyclists and traffic) in Ljubljana , Slovenia Where pedestrians need to cross the road between junctions, a signal-controlled crossing may be provided as an alternative to a zebra crossing or uncontrolled crossing. Traffic lights are normally used at crossings where vehicle speeds are high, where either vehicle or pedestrian flows are high or near signalised junctions. [ 21 ] : c.18 In the UK, this type of crossing is called a pelican crossing . More modern iterations are puffin and pedex crossings. In the UK, these crossings normally need at least four traffic signals, which are of a regular type (red, amber, and green), two facing in each direction. Pedestrians are provided with push buttons and pedestrian signals, consisting of a red and green man. Farside signals are located across the crossing, while nearside signals are located below the traffic lights, facing in the direction of oncoming traffic. [ 21 ] : c.18 A HAWK beacon is a special type of traffic used in the US at mid-block crossings. These consist of two red signals above a single amber signal. The beacon is unlit until a pedestrian pushes the cross button. Then an amber light will show, followed by both red lights, at which point the 'Walk' symbol will illuminate for pedestrians. At the end of the crossing phase, the 'Don't Walk' symbol will flash, as will the amber traffic light. [ 51 ] The Shibuya Crossing , in Tokyo, is a famous example of a pedestrian scramble with diagonal crossings. Pedestrians are usually incorporated into urban signalised junctions in one of four ways: no facilities, parallel walk, walk with traffic, or all-red stages. No facilities may be provided if pedestrian demand is low, in areas where pedestrians are not permitted, or if there is a subway or overpass. No provision of formal facilities means pedestrians will have to self-evaluate when it is safe to cross, which can be intimidating for pedestrians. [ 21 ] : 71 With a "parallel walk" design, pedestrians walk alongside the traffic flow. A leading pedestrian interval may be provided, whereby pedestrians get a "walk" signal before the traffic gets a green light, allowing pedestrians to establish themselves on the crossing before vehicles begin to turn, to encourage drivers to give way. [ 52 ] A 'walk with traffic' facility allows pedestrians to go at the same time as other traffic movements with no conflict between movements. This can work well on one-way roads, where turning movements are banned or where the straight-ahead movement runs in a different stage from the turning movement. A splitter island could also be provided. Traffic will pass on either side of the island and pedestrians can cross the road safely between the other flows. [ 21 ] : 72 An all-red stage, also known as a full pedestrian stage, a pedestrian scramble or a Barnes Dance, [ b ] holds all vehicular traffic at the junction to allow pedestrians time to safely cross without conflict from vehicles. It allows the use of diagonal crossings. This may require a longer cycle time and increase pedestrian wait periods, though the latter can be eased by providing two pedestrian stages. [ 21