Library circulation Book lending-related activity within libraries 
 This article has multiple issues. Please help improve it or discuss these issues on the talk page . ( Learn how and when to remove these messages ) 
 
 This article needs additional citations for verification . Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. Find sources:   "Library circulation"   –   news   · newspapers   · books   · scholar   · JSTOR ( January 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 This article includes a list of general references , but it lacks sufficient corresponding inline citations . Please help to improve this article by introducing more precise citations. ( January 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 
 ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 Circulation desk at the University of Texas at Arlington 's Central Library 
 Library circulation or library lending comprises the activities around the lending of library books and other material to users of a lending library . 

 Description 
 This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( January 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 Library circulation or lending comprises the activities around the lending of library books and other material to users of a lending library . A circulation or lending department is one of the key departments of a library. The main public service point is the circulation desk or loans desk. Public service librarians look to the law to determine their legal obligations and potential liability relating to privacy of library use. The American Library Association affirms that all libraries are forums for information and ideas, and that their Library Bill of Rights should guide their service. 

 Circulation or loans desk 
 The main public service point is the circulation desk or loans desk, usually found near the main entrance of a library. It provides lending services and facilities for return of loaned items. Renewal of materials and payment of fines are also handled at the circulation desk. [ 1 ] Circulation staff may provide basic search and reference services, though more in-depth questions are usually referred to reference librarians at the library reference desk , but the services of both are occasionally combined. The circulation desk is in most cases staffed by library support staff instead of professional librarians. 

 Functions of circulation desk staff 
 A date due slip showing checkout and return activity from 1983 to 2002 
 Date due slip from Harvard's Lamont Library This section does not cite any sources . Please help improve this section by adding citations to reliable sources . Unsourced material may be challenged and removed . ( January 2026 ) ( Learn how and when to remove this message ) 
 Lending materials to library users 
 Checking in materials returned 
 Monitoring materials for damage and routing them to the appropriate staff for repair or replacement 
 Troubleshooting circulation technology, i.e. library circulation software, scanners, printers, etc. 
 Collecting statistics on library use, i.e. patron transactions, material checkouts, etc. 
 Creation of borrowers pockets, i.e. when using the Browne Issue System 
 Charging and receipting overdue fines. 
 Send out overdue notices to borrower. 
 Operating automated filing and recovery system and technology. 
 Adapt to new software and equipment. 
 Perform moderate physical work including the ability to carry, pull, and lift up to 30 pounds. 
 Ability to conduct/reconcile financial reports. 
 Communicate via telephone, email. 
 Ability to see and read materials. 
 Assist patrons at the circulation /reserve desk. 
 Assist circulation supervisor with training student employee if it is an academic environment. 
 Maintain the stacks by re-shelving materials in library by call number whether Dewey Decimal system or Library of Congress system . 
 Resolve issues, such as inappropriate patron conduct, including but not limited to cell phone usages, open drink containers, and inappropriate noise levels 

 Intellectual Freedom Committee 
 Public service librarians look to the law to determine their legal obligations and potential liability relating to privacy of library use. The potential liability or punishment for librarians, who fail to protect confidentiality of individual library use, is largely a matter of state law without record of prosecution or civil suit. Remedies for individuals whose information has been deliberately shared with or unknowingly collected by third parties vary widely and are sometimes unclear. 

 Established December 1, 1967, the Office for Intellectual Freedom is charged with implementing American Library Association (ALA) policies. Those policies concerning the concept of intellectual freedom as embodied in the Library Bill of Rights, the Association's basic policy on free access to libraries and library materials. 

 Library Bill of Rights 
 The American Library Association affirms that all libraries are forums for information and ideas, and that the following basic policies (in their Library Bill of Rights) should guide their service 

 I. Books and other library resources should be provided for the interest, information, and enlightenment of all people of the community the library serves. Materials should not be excluded because of the origin, background, or views of those contributing to their creation. 
II. Libraries should provide materials and information presenting all points of view on current and historical issues. Materials should not be proscribed or removed because of partisan or doctrinal disapproval. 
III. Libraries should challenge censorship in the fulfillment of their responsibility to provide information and enlightenment. 
IV. Libraries should cooperate with all persons and groups concerned with resisting abridgment of free expression and free access to ideas. 
V. A person's right to use a library should not be denied or abridged because of origin, age, background, or views. 
VI. Libraries which make exhibit spaces and meeting rooms available to the public they serve should make such facilities available on an equitable basis, regardless of the beliefs or affiliations of individuals or groups requesting their use. 
VII. All people, regardless of origin, age, background, or views, possess a right to privacy and confidentiality in their library use. Libraries should advocate for, educate about, and protect people's privacy, safeguarding all library use data, including personally identifiable information. Adopted June 19, 1939, by the ALA Council; amended October 14, 1944; June 18, 1948; February 2, 1961; June 27, 1967; January 23, 1980; January 29, 2019; inclusion of "age" reaffirmed January 23, 1996. [ 2 ] 

 See also 
 Controlled digital lending 
 Interlibrary loan 
 Library reference desk 

 References 
 
 ↑ "Circulation" . Kent State University . Kent State University . Retrieved 1 April 2015 . 
 ↑ "Library Bill of Rights" . Advocacy, Legislation & Issues . 2006-06-30 . Retrieved 2021-10-09 . 
 
 
 Code of ethics of the American Library Association (2014, November 25). American Library Association. 
 Federal libraries and intellectual freedom .(2014, November 25). 
 Library bill of rights . (2014, November 25). American Library Association. 
 Montana: front desk circulation assistant 10070726 . (2014, August 11). Plus Media Solutions US Official News. Retrieved from LexisNexis Academic . 
 Weingand, D. E. (1997). Customer service excellence: a concise guide for librarians. American Library Association. 
 

 v t e Libraries and library science Types of library 
 Academic 
 Archive 
 Branch 
 Children's 
 Christian 
 Consortium 
 Digital 
 shadow 
 Hybrid 
 Law 
 Lending 
 Library of things 
 Map 
 Medicine 
 Mobile 
 Music 
 National 
 Presidential 
 U.S. 
 Prison 
 Private 
 Public 
 Carnegie 
 Research 
 School 
 Learning Resource Centre 
 virtual 
 Special collections 
 Special library 
 Street 
 Subscription 
 Tool 
 Toy 
 Transportation 
 Traveling 
 Types of librarian 
 Distance education 
 E-science 
 Medical record 
 Music 
 ensemble 
 Periodicals/serials 
 School 
 Information professional 
 Informationist 
 Library and information scientist 
 Library science 
 Five laws 
 Library and information science 
 Education for librarianship 
 Acquisitions 
 Archival science 
 Assessment 
 Cataloging 
 catalog 
 OPAC 
 Circulation 
 Classification 
 Collection development 
 Collective collection 
 Conservation 
 Discovery system 
 Electronic resource management 
 Information literacy 
 Inventory 
 Legal deposit 
 Library history 
 Library instruction 
 Library management 
 Library publishing 
 Preservation 
 Readers' advisory 
 Reference 
 virtual 
 roving 
 Stack 
 Mobile shelving 
 Technical services 
 Weeding 
 History 
 History of libraries 
 History of library science 
 Lists 
 Libraries 
 by country 
 by size 
 ancient 
 destroyed 
 medical 
 national 
 Library associations 
 Library schools 
 Librarians 
 women 
 fictional 
 Archivists 
 women 
 
 Category:Libraries 
 Category:Library science 
 Commons 
 Glossary 
 Outline 
 WikiProject 
 
 v t e Books Production 
 Binding 
 Covers 
 dust jackets 
 Design 
 Editing 
 Illustration 
 Illuminated manuscripts 
 Printing 
 edition 
 history 
 incunabula 
 instant book 
 limited edition 
 Publishing 
 advance copy 
 hardcover 
 paperback 
 Size 
 Typesetting 
 Volume (bibliography) 
 Collection (publishing) 
 Book series 
 Consumption 
 Awards 
 Bestsellers 
 list 
 Bibliography 
 Bibliomania ( tsundoku ) 
 Bibliophilia 
 Bibliotherapy 
 Bookmarks 
 Bookselling 
 blurbs 
 book towns 
 history 
 used 
 Censorship 
 Clubs 
 Collecting 
 Digitizing 
 Bookworm (insect) 
 Furniture
 bookcases 
 bookends 
 Library 
 Print culture 
 Reading 
 literacy 
 Reviews 
 By country 
 Brazil 
 China 
 France 
 Germany 
 Italy 
 Japan 
 Netherlands 
 Pakistan 
 Spain 
 United Kingdom 
 United States 
 Other 
 Genres
 non-fiction 
 novel 
 imaginary 
 miniature 
 pop-up 
 textbook 
 Grimoire 
 Formats
 audiobooks 
 Ebooks 
 Folio 
 Coffee table book 
 Related 
 Banned books 
 Book burning 
 incidents 
 Nazi 
 Book curses 
 Book packaging 
 Book swapping 
 Book tour 
 Conservation and restoration 
 Dog ears 
 History of books 
 scroll 
 codex 
 Intellectual property 
 ISBN 
 Outline 
 Preservation 
 The Philobiblon 
 World Book Day 
 World Book Capital 
 
 Outline 
 Category 
 Portal 
 

 Authority control databases International GND FAST National United States Prêt (bibliothèques)</span>"}]]}'> France Prêt (bibliothèques)</span>"}]]}'> BnF data Spain Israel Other Yale LUX