A thermostat senses the temperature of a physical system and performs actions to maintain that temperature near a desired setpoint.
The system operates as a "closed loop" control device by seeking to reduce the error between the desired and measured temperatures.
A thermostat exerts control by switching heating or cooling devices on or off or by regulating the flow of a heat transfer fluid.
Conventional "bang-bang" controllers operate the system at full capacity once the setpoint is reached or remain completely off.
System control must include hysteresis to prevent excessively rapid cycling of the equipment around the setpoint.
An anticipator stops the heating or cooling action slightly before reaching the setpoint to prevent temperature overshoot.
A "normally open" (NO) contact configuration closes the circuit when the temperature rises above the setpoint.
A "normally closed" (NC) contact configuration opens the circuit when the temperature rises above the setpoint.
A "change over" (CO) configuration can simultaneously act as both normally open and normally closed settings.
Bimetallic sensors convert temperature changes into mechanical displacement to actuate control of heating or cooling sources.
Electronic thermostats use thermistors or semiconductor sensors to process temperature changes as electronic signals.
Wax pellet thermostats progressively increase or decrease valve openings in response to temperature changes to balance fluid flow.
Wax pellet driven valves exhibit hysteresis due to the phase transition between solid and liquid states.
Gas-driven thermostats use expanding gas against a diaphragm to reduce the flow of gas to a burner as the temperature increases.
Pneumatic thermostats respond to pressure changes in air-filled control tubes to activate heating or cooling.
Standard pneumatic thermostats maintain "mains" air pressure between 15 and 18 psi.
Millivolt thermostats are powered by a thermopile heated by a pilot light and do not require an external electrical power supply.
Most modern low-voltage thermostats operate on 24-volt AC control circuits provided by a transformer.
Line-voltage thermostats directly switch system power, often exceeding 40 amperes of current.
Low-voltage thermostats must not be used on line-voltage circuits to prevent device failure or fire.
Many digital thermostats require batteries to operate the internal electronics and LCD screen.
"Power stealing" digital thermostats harvest energy from 24-volt AC circuits but cannot operate on millivolt circuits.
Digital thermostats use either a relay or a semiconductor device, such as a triac, to switch HVAC units.
Modern thermostats can use adaptive algorithms to calculate the exact activation time required to reach a specific temperature by a specific time.
PID or MPC controllers are used for industrial applications requiring high precision and stable temperatures.
In modern vehicles, thermostats may be bypassed to allow coolant to flow through the heater core even when the main valve is closed.
Thermostatic mixing valves regulate the ratio of hot and cold water to prevent scalding while allowing high-temperature storage for bacteria control.
The setpoint on a mechanical thermostat is adjusted by moving a lever or rotating a post to change the bimetallic coil position.
Programmable thermostats allow the user to define different temperature setpoints for specific times of day or days of the week.
Some programmable thermostats can control line-voltage systems using continuous control to mimic a dimmer effect for constant heat.